---
layout: post
title: big wheel
---

An erstwhile thought on a patchwork plane: reality is only flat until the wall the screen is mounted on bursts in.

Capital may be totalizing, but the ground moves. The priest of the post-political age, more transparently than ever, is Captain Sparrow on the big wheel. There is not just one plateau, after all:

> Never believe that a smooth surface will save us.[^1]

Software engineering graduates in the United States flock each year to (social) media giants or federal contractors or Beltway consultancies feeding (on) them &mdash; that is, to the money, although there is probably less around this year than usual &mdash; and learn to wear their countenances glassy like the buildings they work in.

I would know. I did, sort of. I networked state DMVs. What do the others do, one wonders? Protect the nation? Connect the globe? Innovate? Maybe cybersecurity, or trawling and brokerage of the planet's information-scape, or whack-a-mole with propaganda mills out to swing elections in purportedly democratic nations? All this and more, probably.

Whatever software has eaten or been eaten by, we will not be able to compute away collapsing infrastructure, a generation sentenced to debt, dependence, and decline, an excess of carbon in the atmosphere, or the erosion of arable land across the national breadbasket (and any consequent paucity in the grain silos).

The insurmountable contradiction in the great dead materialist enterprise was that it could not provide for its people. One contradiction in the live one, at least in its American incarnation, is that it seems nearly to have forgotten to.

Another is that, concurrent with Pinker et al's Panglossian emissions, we see pervasive psychological distress, in response to which we consider

> mental illness an individual chemico-biological problem[^2]

and consign its "treatment" to overpriced pharmaceuticals, overworked clinical practitioners, and family members. Digital health, a field I came up in, labors to internalize the self-regulatory process further: "self-health" attempts to equip us with the means to intervene in our own cognition, pruning those elements of ourselves which do not serve our interests. 

This personalization of mental health is not an outright refusal to admit systemic aggravations, but it is perhaps a more or less unconscious abdication of interpersonal politics. "You're on your own," it says, "but I can help you help yourself." That the "I" tends to remain a human being (the death on arrival of chatbot therapy and automated CBT notwithstanding) is little consolation.

Despite tireless efforts and noble intentions, the task remains Sisyphean. Rates of depression, anxiety, and similar afflictions continue to climb, especially among the young; even those constantly told they are the vanguard of human potential, those on college and university campuses, upon the contents of whose psyches academic psychology establishes its precepts.

---

[^1]: Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari. (1980). A Thousand Plateaus. 500.

[^2]: Fisher, M. (2009). Capitalist Realism. 37.
